Mountains are very special places. For many, they are sacred; to most, they bring an uplifting of the spirit and refreshment; to a few, they bring fear. They are the home of many different people on every continent. They occur in all biogeographical regions of the world. They are treasuries of high biodiversity and rich in endemic species. Mountains tend to have different climate conditions and a variety of geological and physiographic features. They provide magnificent scenery and the qualities of remoteness and wilderness. This essay on mountains will help students understand the different types of mountain, their importance and how they attract tourists and young people for adventure activities. Students who want to improve their writing skills must have a look at the list of CBSE Essays and practise these essays on different topics.

500+ Words Essay on Mountain
India is a vast country with varied landforms. There are vast stretches of plain land, hilly regions, mountains and valleys. The land of India displays great physical variations, such as mountains, plains, deserts, plateaus and islands. Not only in India but in the entire world, mountains cover a significant portion of the land area, and their resources play an increasingly crucial role in the development.

Mountains and Their Types
Mountains are of different types and are known by their range. Many mountains consist of a series of parallel ranges extending over hundreds of kilometres. The Himalayas, the Andes and the Alps are mountain ranges of Asia, South America and Europe, respectively. Mountains vary in height and shape.

There are mainly three types of mountains:

Fold Mountains: These are created where two or more of Earth’s tectonic plates are pushed together.
Example: The Himalayan Mountains in India and the Alps in Europe. The Aravali range in India is one of the oldest mountain ranges in the world.
Block Mountains: These are created when large areas are broken and displaced vertically.
Example: The Rhine valley and the Vosges mountain in Europe.
Volcanic Mountains: These are formed due to volcanic activity.
Example: Mt.Kilimanjaro in Africa and Mt.Fujiyama in Japan
Importance of Mountains
Mountains are very important for the ecosystem. They are a storehouse of water. Many rivers have their source in the glaciers in the mountains. With the help of these mountains, reservoirs are made, and the water is harnessed for the use of people. The water from the mountains is also used for irrigation. It is also used to generate hydroelectricity in hilly areas. Most of the area covered by mountains is green as a wide variety of flora and fauna is found here. So, these mountains provide fuel, shelter, fodder and other products like gum, raisins, etc. These mountains help in maintaining the balance of the ecosystem.

Mountain as an Attraction for Tourist and Adventure Activities
Mountains are a very popular and attractive destination for tourists. Especially in summer, people like to go to hilly areas with their family and friends. They spend their vacation relaxing in the lapse of the mountain. The scenic beauty of mountains makes their eyes shine and refreshes their mind, which ultimately gives them peace. The mountains are also liked by young people. They like to come here and do adventure activities. Some of the popular activities are paragliding, river rafting, bicycling, trekking, hang gliding and skiing.